# Memory modelling using behavioral data from an odor naming memory task -  Link on biorXiv: 

The full document will be submitted on bioRxiv soon. I will provide the link here.
Title: Elusive scents: neurocomputational mechanisms  of verbal omissions in free odor naming 

N. Chrysanthidis, R. Raj, T. Hörberg, R. Lindroos, A. Lansner, P., EJ Laukka, M Larsson, J. Olofsson, P. Herman (2024) BiorXiv

Abstract: Odor naming is considered as a particularly challenging test of olfactory cognitive ability. It is common that in free odor naming scenarios people fail to respond with any linguistic label to certain odors they smell, resulting in what is called an omission (i.e., a lack of response). The cognitive demands and the nature of interactions between olfactory memory and language related brain resources are not well understood. Here with the support of a computational model we offer a hypothesis about neural network mechanisms underlying the frequently observed phenomenon of omissions in free odor naming tasks. The available behavioral data that we analyzed in this study suggest that odors commonly referred to by multiple linguistic labels tend to produce elevated omission rates in a free odor-naming task. To explain this observation at the systems level of interacting cortical systems accounting for olfactory perception and language (semantic) processing, we developed a computational model consisting of two associatively coupled attractor memory networks (the odor and language network), and investigated the effect of Hebbian-like learning on the simulated task performance. We used distributed network representations for the odor percepts and word label mental objects, and accounted for their statistical inter-relationships (correlations) extracted from available data on odor perceptual similarity, and from a large Swedish odor language corpus, respectively. In this study, we suggested and evaluated with experimental data a novel hypothesis that Bayesian-Hebbian synaptic plasticity mechanisms can explain memory omissions casting new light on the underlying mechanisms of this frequently observed memory phenomenon in odor naming tasks. plasticity might explain omission and forgetting in odor naming tasks. Due to the nature of Bayesian-Hebbian associative learning connecting the two networks, there was a progressively weaker coupling for odors paired with multiple different labels in the encoding process. Thus, when the model was cued with perceptual odor stimuli, the olfactory language network often produced subthreshold network responses resulting in elevated omissions. In addition, we suggested that poor performance in odor naming could also arise due to a significant  overlap between odors that share perceptual similarities which increases competition in the network model.


Part of this work was presented at the Conference of Cognitive Computational Neuroscience (2024.
Chrysanthidis,N.,Rohan R.,Lindroos R.,Lansner A.,Olofsson J.,Herman P.2024. Fuzzy learning can decouple language
and odor representations: Associative memory loss in acomputational model. Conference of CognitiveComputational
Neuroscience. https://2024.ccneuro.org/poster/?id=320
